Create table pattern with data quality checks and setup/ teardown use case (#2870)
astronomer/docs: learn/use-case-setup-teardown-data-quality.md

---
title: "Use setup/ teardown to run data quality checks before running a rose classification model"
description: "Use setup/ teardown to run data quality checks in an MLOps pipeline."
id: use-case-setup-teardown-data-quality
sidebar_label: "Efficient data quality checks for ML"
---

> To get valuable insight from machine learning models you need to make sure that the data you use to train them is of high quality. This project shows a best-practice pattern using [setup/ teardown tasks](airflow-setup-teardown.md), [SQL check operators](airflow-sql-data-quality.md), [task groups](task-groups.md), [Airflow Datasets](airflow-datasets.md) and the [Astro Python SDK](astro-python-sdk.md) to run integrated [data quality](data-quality.md) checks on a newly created relational table before training a classification model. The table creation pattern shown is modelled after our internal Astronomer ETL pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get valuable insight from machine learning models, you need to make sure that the data you use to train them is of high quality. This project shows a best-practice pattern using [setup/ teardown tasks](airflow-setup-teardown.md), [SQL check operators](airflow-sql-data-quality.md), [task groups](task-groups.md), [Airflow Datasets](airflow-datasets.md) and the [Astro Python SDK](astro-python-sdk.md) to run integrated [data quality](data-quality.md) checks on a newly created relational table before training a classification model. The table creation pattern shown is modeled after our internal Astronomer ETL pipelines.
```

The [`create_rose_table`](https://github.com/astronomer/use-case-setup-teardown-data-quality/blob/main/dags/create_rose_table.py) is organized using nested [task groups](task-groups.md). A big advantage of this pattern is both easier navigation of the DAG graph and the ability to [template the task group pattern](task-groups.md#custom-task-group-classes) and turn it into a reusable module inside your DAGs.

The create table pattern shown in this example starts with creating and populating a temporary table. This is especially prudent in production, when the target table is currently under use, for example serving a dashboard or machine learning model. Both, table creation (`create_tmp`) and loading data into the table (`load_data_into_tmp`) are defined as setup tasks, the task which drops the temporary table `drop_tmp` is the corresponding teardown task.
The full setup/ teardown workflow includes the tasks `create_tmp`, `load_data_into_tmp`, the task group `test_tmp`, `swap` and `drop_tmp`.

![Graph view of the create_table task group showing the 5 tasks that make up the setup/ teardown workflow.](/img/examples/use-case-setup-teardown-data-quality_setup_teardown_workflow.png)

> The code snippet below shows how the setup/ teardown workflow is created by calling the `.as_teardown` method on a regular Airflow task object and supplying all associated setup tasks to the `setups` parameter. The tasks in the scope of the setup/ teardown workflow, which are both tasks in the `test_tmp` task group, as well as the `swap` task, are automatically added determined because they lie in between the setup and teardown tasks in the dependency structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code snippet below shows how the setup/ teardown workflow is created by calling the `.as_teardown` method on a regular Airflow task object and supplying all associated setup tasks to the `setups` parameter. The `test_tmp` task group and the `swap` task tasks automatically determined to be in scope of the setup/teardown workflow because they lie in between the setup and teardown tasks in the dependency structure.
```

```python
SQLColumnCheckOperator(
    task_id="test_cols",
    retry_on_failure="True",
    table=f"{SCHEMA_NAME}.{TABLE_NAME}_tmp",
    column_mapping={
        "petal_size_cm": {"min": {"geq_to": 5}, "max": {"leq_to": 11}},
        "stem_length_cm": {"min": {"geq_to": 19}, "max": {"leq_to": 51}},
        "leaf_size_cm": {"min": {"geq_to": 3}, "max": {"leq_to": 9}},
    },
    accept_none="True",
)
```

The `test_table` task runs checks on the whole table to make sure we have enough rows for our downstream model to be trained (over 500 rows) and that the `rose_type` column only contains the three cultivars we are interested in.

```python
SQLTableCheckOperator(
    task_id="test_table",
    retry_on_failure="True",
    table=f"{SCHEMA_NAME}.{TABLE_NAME}_tmp",
    checks={
        "row_count_check": {"check_statement": "COUNT(*) > 500"},
        "rose_type_check": {
            "check_statement": "rose_type IN ('damask', 'tea', 'moss')"
        },
    },
)
```

> Only if the new data passes vital data quality checks contained in the `test_tmp` task group, the temporary table is swapped with the target table. The SQL statement that swaps the table is wrapped in a `DO` block that checks if the target table already exists and creates a backup table if it does.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the new data passes the data quality checks contained in the `test_tmp` task group, the temporary table is swapped with the target table. The SQL statement that swaps the table is wrapped in a `DO` block that checks if the target table already exists and creates a backup table if it does.
```

```python
swap = PostgresOperator(
    task_id="swap",
    sql=f"""
        DO
        $$
        BEGIN
        IF EXISTS (
            SELECT 1 FROM information_schema.tables 
            WHERE table_name = '{TABLE_NAME}' AND table_schema = 'public'
        ) 
        THEN
            EXECUTE 'ALTER TABLE ' || '{TABLE_NAME}' || ' RENAME TO ' || '{TABLE_NAME}_backup';
        END IF;
        END
        $$;
        CREATE TABLE {TABLE_NAME} AS SELECT * FROM {TABLE_NAME}_tmp;
        """,
)
```

> In our demo pipeline the backup table will be dropped after the swap and dropping of the temporary table is successful, in a production pipeline you might consider delaying dropping the backup table for longer, to allow for a rollback in case the new table contains errors that were not anticipated by the existing data quality checks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our demo pipeline, the backup table will be dropped after the swap and dropping of the temporary table is successful. In a production pipeline, you might consider delaying dropping the backup table for longer to allow for a rollback in case the new table contains errors that were not anticipated by the existing data quality checks.
```

> The creation and dropping of the backup table is defined as a second setup/ teardown workflow without the only task in its scope being `drop_tmp`.

Reviewer: Re-word this? I'm not sure I understand what this is trying to say, so I don't have a suggestion, but finding it confusing

The `test_cols` task runs a checks on individual columns of the temporary table, in this case to check that the `petal_size_cm`, `stem_length_cm` and `leaf_size_cm` columns contain values in a reasonable range for these rose cultivars. To learn more about defining data quality check statements in the SQLColumnCheckOperator and SQLTableCheckOperator, see the [How it works](airflow-sql-data-quality.md#how-it-works) section of the related tutorial.

```python
SQLColumnCheckOperator(
    task_id="test_cols",
    retry_on_failure="True",
    table=f"{SCHEMA_NAME}.{TABLE_NAME}_tmp",
    column_mapping={
        "petal_size_cm": {"min": {"geq_to": 5}, "max": {"leq_to": 11}},
        "stem_length_cm": {"min": {"geq_to": 19}, "max": {"leq_to": 51}},
        "leaf_size_cm": {"min": {"geq_to": 3}, "max": {"leq_to": 9}},
    },
    accept_none="True",
)
```

> The `test_table` task runs checks on the whole table to make sure we have enough rows for our downstream model to be trained (over 500 rows) and that the `rose_type` column only contains the three cultivars we are interested in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `test_table` task runs checks on the table to make sure that there's enough rows for the downstream model to be trained, and that the `rose_type` column only contains three cultivars.
```

```python
SQLTableCheckOperator(
    task_id="test_table",
    retry_on_failure="True",
    table=f"{SCHEMA_NAME}.{TABLE_NAME}_tmp",
    checks={
        "row_count_check": {"check_statement": "COUNT(*) > 500"},
        "rose_type_check": {
            "check_statement": "rose_type IN ('damask', 'tea', 'moss')"
        },
    },
)
```

> If the new data passes the data quality checks contained in the `test_tmp` task group, the temporary table is swapped with the target table. The SQL statement that swaps the table is wrapped in a `DO` block that checks if the target table already exists and creates a backup table if it does.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the new data passes the data quality checks, the temporary table is swapped with the target table. The SQL statement that swaps the table is wrapped in a `DO` block that checks if the target table already exists and creates a backup table if it does.
```

```python
swap = PostgresOperator(
    task_id="swap",
    sql=f"""
        DO
        $$
        BEGIN
        IF EXISTS (
            SELECT 1 FROM information_schema.tables 
            WHERE table_name = '{TABLE_NAME}' AND table_schema = 'public'
        ) 
        THEN
            EXECUTE 'ALTER TABLE ' || '{TABLE_NAME}' || ' RENAME TO ' || '{TABLE_NAME}_backup';
        END IF;
        END
        $$;
        CREATE TABLE {TABLE_NAME} AS SELECT * FROM {TABLE_NAME}_tmp;
        """,
)
```

> In our demo pipeline, the backup table will be dropped after the swap and dropping of the temporary table is successful. In a production pipeline, you might consider delaying dropping the backup table for longer to allow for a rollback in case the new table contains errors that were not anticipated by the existing data quality checks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this demo pipeline, the backup table will be dropped after the swap and drop of the temporary table is successful. In a production pipeline, you might consider delaying dropping the backup table to allow for a rollback in case the new table contains errors that were not anticipated by the existing data quality checks.
```

> The `swap` task creates the backup table, which is why we define it as a setup task as well. The associated teardown task is `drop_backup`, the task that drops the backup table. There is only one task in the scope of this setup/ teardown workflow in this DAG, the `drop_tmp` task. Defining this second setup/ teardown workflow ensures that the backup table is dropped even if the dropping of the temporary table is not successful, ensuring idempotency of the DAG.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `swap` task creates the backup table, which is why it's defined as a setup task. The associated teardown task is `drop_backup`, the task that drops the backup table. Defining this second setup/ teardown workflow ensures that the backup table is dropped even if the dropping of the temporary table is not successful, ensuring idempotency of the DAG.
```

```python
swap = PostgresOperator(
    task_id="swap",
    # SQL statement to swap the temporary table with the target table
)

# ...

drop_backup = PostgresOperator(
    task_id="drop_backup",
    # SQL statement to drop the backup table
)

# ...

chain(
    # ...
    swap,
    drop_tmp,
    drop_backup,
    # ...
)

# define setup/ teardown relationship
# ...
drop_backup.as_teardown(setups=[swap])
```

> In the second half of the create table task group, the nested `validate` task group runs non-halting data quality checks on the target table. These checks are defined using the same two SQL check operators as the halting checks on the temporary table. If the data fails the checks in this second task group, the pipeline will not be stopped, but the check failures are printed to the logs. It is common to set up [notifications](error-notifications-in-airflow.md) to alert relevant data stakeholders of these check failures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the second half of the task group, the nested `validate` task group runs non-halting data quality checks on the target table. These checks are defined using the same two SQL check operators as the halting checks on the temporary table. If the data fails the checks in this second task group, the pipeline will not be stopped, but the check failures are printed to the logs. It is common to set up [notifications](error-notifications-in-airflow.md) to alert relevant data stakeholders of these check failures.
```

![Graph view of the second half of the create table task group showing the nested validate task group with two data quality check tasks, as well as the downstream `sql_check_done` task.](/img/examples/use-case-setup-teardown-data-quality_validate_taskgroup.png)

> Validation level checks often contain more stringent checks than the halting checks, for example to make sure that the data is not only in a reasonable range, but also within the expected range. The code snippet below shows the `test_cols` task checks, containing more strict ranges for the numerical columns of the dataset. The `test_table` task checks that the table contains at least 800 rows and at least 20 rows for the `tea` cultivar. The `month_check` task checks that the `blooming_month` column only contains the months in which we expect these roses to bloom.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Validation level checks often contain more stringent checks than the halting checks, for example to make sure that the data is not only in a reasonable range, but also within the expected range. The following checks ensure that [fill in the blank]
```
Can we generalize these checks to avoid repeating their function in English? I think it's better to let the code do the talking here.

            "stem_length_cm": {"min": {"geq_to": 20}, "max": {"leq_to": 50}},
            "leaf_size_cm": {"min": {"geq_to": 4}, "max": {"leq_to": 8}},
        },
        accept_none="True",
    )

    test_table = SQLTableCheckOperator(
        task_id="test_table",
        retry_on_failure="True",
        table=f"{SCHEMA_NAME}.{TABLE_NAME}",
        checks={
            "row_count_check": {"check_statement": "COUNT(*) > 800"},
            "at_least_20_tea_check": {
                "check_statement": "COUNT(*) >= 20",
                "partition_clause": "rose_type = 'tea'",
            },
            "month_check": {
                "check_statement": "blooming_month IN ('April', 'May', 'June', 'July', 'August', 'September')"
            },
        },
    )
```

No matter the outcome of the data quality checks in the `validate` task group, the pipeline will continue because the `sql_check_done` task uses the [trigger rule](managing-dependencies.md#trigger-rules) `all_done` to always be successful. 

```python
@task(trigger_rule="all_done")
def sql_check_done():
    return "Additional data quality checks are done!"
```

> By changing the trigger rule of the `sql_check_done` task and the `done` task running after the `drop_backup` task you can change the impact failures in the `create_table` task group have on the continuation of the larger pipeline. For example you may want to set the trigger rule of the `sql_check_done` task to `all_success` during development to only continue the pipeline if the data passes validation checks or set the trigger rule of the `done` task to `all_done` to allow the pipeline to continue using the old table if the swapping in of the new table fails.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you change the trigger rule of the `sql_check_done` task and the `done` task running after the `drop_backup` task, you can change the impact that failures have on the larger pipeline. For example, you might want to set the trigger rule of the `sql_check_done` task to `all_success` during development to only continue the pipeline if the data passes validation checks, or you might set the trigger rule of the `done` task to `all_done` to allow the pipeline to continue using the old table if the swapping in of the new table fails.
```
Maybe enclose this in a `:::tip` box?

Lastly, the `table_ready_for_the_model` task produces to the [Airflow dataset](airflow-datasets.md) `postgres://public/roses` to trigger the downstream `rose_classification` DAG.

```python
@task(
    outlets=[Dataset(f"postgres://{SCHEMA_NAME}/{TABLE_NAME}")],
)
def table_ready_for_the_model():

>     return "The table is ready, modelling can begin!"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    return "The table is ready, modeling can begin!"
```
US english moment 🤦

    from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
    from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler

    # converting column names to str for the Scaler
    df.columns = [str(col).replace("'", "").replace('"', "") for col in df.columns]

    df = pd.get_dummies(df, columns=["blooming_month"], drop_first=True)
    X = df.drop(["rose_type", "index"], axis=1)

    y = df["rose_type"]

    X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(
        X, y, test_size=0.2, random_state=42
    )

    scaler = StandardScaler()

    X_train_scaled = pd.DataFrame(
        scaler.fit_transform(X_train), columns=X_train.columns, index=X_train.index
    )
    X_test_scaled = pd.DataFrame(
        scaler.transform(X_test), columns=X_test.columns, index=X_test.index
    )

    train_data = pd.concat([X_train_scaled, y_train], axis=1)
    test_data = pd.concat([X_test_scaled, y_test], axis=1)

    return {
        "train_data": train_data,
        "test_data": test_data,
    }

# ...

roses_features = feature_engineering(
    df=Table(
        conn_id=POSTGRES_CONN_ID,
        name=TABLE_NAME,
        metadata=Metadata(
            schema=SCHEMA_NAME,
        ),
    )
)
```

> The `train_model` task ingests the dictionary returned by the `feature_engineering` task and trains a [RandomForestClassifier](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier.html#sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier) on the training data. The fitted model is then used to predict the `rose_type` of the test data. The `train_model` task prints the [accuracy](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/model_evaluation.html#accuracy-score), [f1-score](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.f1_score.html#sklearn.metrics.f1_score) and a classification report to the logs and returns a dictionary of model results for the downstream plotting task.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `train_model` task ingests the dictionary and trains a [RandomForestClassifier](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier.html#sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier) on the training data. The fitted model is then used to predict the `rose_type` of the test data. 

The `train_model` task prints the [accuracy](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/model_evaluation.html#accuracy-score), [f1-score](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.f1_score.html#sklearn.metrics.f1_score), and a classification report to the logs and returns a dictionary of model results for the downstream plotting task.
```

        roc_curve,
    )

    train_data = input_data["train_data"]
    test_data = input_data["test_data"]

    X_train = train_data.drop(["rose_type"], axis=1)
    y_train = train_data["rose_type"]
    X_test = test_data.drop(["rose_type"], axis=1)
    y_test = test_data["rose_type"]

    clf = RandomForestClassifier(n_estimators=1000, random_state=23)
    clf.fit(X_train, y_train)
    y_pred = clf.predict(X_test)

    acc = accuracy_score(y_test, y_pred)
    f1 = f1_score(y_test, y_pred, average="weighted")
    fpr, tpr, thresholds = roc_curve(
        y_test, clf.predict_proba(X_test)[:, 1], pos_label=clf.classes_[1]
    )

    print("Accuracy:", acc)
    print("F1-Score:", f1)
    print(classification_report(y_test, y_pred))

    labels_df = pd.DataFrame(clf.classes_)
    true_vs_pred = pd.concat(
        [y_test, pd.Series(y_pred, index=y_test.index)],
        axis=1,
    )
    true_vs_pred.columns = ["y_test", "y_pred"]
    roc_df = pd.DataFrame({"fpr": fpr, "tpr": tpr, "thresholds": thresholds})

    return {
        "true_vs_pred": true_vs_pred,
        "labels_df": labels_df,
        "accuracy": acc,
        "f1_score": f1,
        "roc_df": roc_df,
    }
```

> Lastly, the model results are plotted using [matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/) and [seaborn](https://seaborn.pydata.org/) in the `plot_results` task. The plot is saved in the `include` directory of the local Astro project, if you are running this pipeline in production make sure to save it to persistent storage. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Lastly, the model results are plotted using [matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/) and [seaborn](https://seaborn.pydata.org/) in the `plot_results` task. The plot is saved in the `include` directory of the local Astro project. If you are running this pipeline in production, make sure to save this file to persistent storage. 
```

        fmt="g",
        cmap="Blues",
        ax=ax[0],
        xticklabels=labels,
        yticklabels=labels,
    )
    ax[0].set_xlabel("Predicted labels")
    ax[0].set_ylabel("True labels")
    ax[0].set_title("Confusion Matrix")

    roc_auc = auc(fpr, tpr)
    label_text = (
        f"ROC curve (area = {roc_auc:.2f})"
        f"\nAccuracy = {acc:.2f}"
        f"\nF1 Score = {f1:.2f}"
    )

    ax[1].plot(fpr, tpr, color="darkgreen", label=label_text)
    ax[1].plot([0, 1], [0, 1], color="navy", linestyle="--")
    ax[1].set_xlim([0.0, 1.0])
    ax[1].set_ylim([0.0, 1.05])
    ax[1].set_xlabel("False Positive Rate")
    ax[1].set_ylabel("True Positive Rate")
    ax[1].set_title("ROC")
    ax[1].legend(loc="lower left", bbox_to_anchor=(0.10, 0.01))

    img = plt.imread("include/rosa_centifolia.png")
    ax_ratio = ax[1].get_data_ratio()
    img_ratio = img.shape[1] / img.shape[0]
    width = 0.2
    height = width * 1.3 / (img_ratio * ax_ratio)
    x_start = 0.78
    y_start = 0
    extent = [x_start, x_start + width, y_start, y_start + height]
    ax[1].imshow(img, aspect="auto", extent=extent, zorder=1)

    plt.tight_layout()
    plt.savefig("include/results.png")
```

> The [aql.cleanup](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/cleanup.html) task is run in parallel to the rest of the DAG and cleans up any temporary tables that were created as soon as they are no longer needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [aql.cleanup](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/cleanup.html) task is run in parallel to the rest of the DAG and cleans up any temporary tables after they're no longer needed.
```

> Congratulations! You ran an end to end pipeline from creating a table in a best practice pattern including two sets of efficient data quality checks to model training and plotting! Use this project as a blueprint to build your own data-driven pipelines.

Reviewer 2: Should this "Congrats" be at the end of "Run the project" instead?
